# Agenda Items
1. Review the fundamental concepts of ROS
2. Check if anyone had issues with installing ROS
3. Talk about workspaces and packages

# Review
ROS stands for the Robot Operating System, and although it is not technically an OS, it is a well-designed framework that supports multiple programming languages and robot systems. The versatility of ROS is provided by its abstract communication layer composed of nodes, topics, and services. ROS2 is the second iteration of ROS, and was designed to make ROS more accessible and portable, with a new build system and increased functionality. You are free to read more about these changes on the [developer site](https://design.ros2.org/articles/changes.html).

# Making a workspace
ROS demands a particular directory structure (directory means folder, directory structure refers to how files and subfolders are arranged within this folder). These workspaces contain packages and must be "built". The best practice is to make a separate folder for each of your workspaces. I recommend that you create a folder called ros_workshop, where you will put all of your ROS-related files. Here's my directory structure:

```bash
.
├── cpp_ws
│   ├── build
│   ├── install
│   ├── log
│   └── src
└── python_ws
    └── src
```

You only need to create the `src/` directory -- all others should be generated whenever you run `colcon build` in your workspace. If you would like to follow the [ROS tutorial](https://index.ros.org/doc/ros2/Tutorials/Workspace/Creating-A-Workspace/) exactly, feel free to make another directory called `dev_ws/` with a subdirectory `src/`. *Please note that on Windows, directories are delimited by `\` instead of `/`.*
