ros_workshop/week_4/4.md, before:

# Agenda
1. More on ROS 2 Messaging
2. Create a simple simulation with ROS 2 and Simulink
3. Take poll on Gazebo vs. Robotics Systems Toolbox

## Helpful Commands
`ros2 node list` lists all nodes in the network
`ros2 topic list` lists all topics in the network
`ros2 msg list` lists all message types defined in ROS 2

# Quality of Service Policies
Last week we looked at creating publishers and subscribers in ROS 2, and connected them with topics. This week we're going to fill in some gaps that appeared with topics. Topics in ROS 2 have 4 paramaters:
1. History - Message queue mode
2. Depth - Message queue size
3. Reliability - Delivery guarantee of messages
4. Durability - Persistence of messages

To understand why history and depth are useful, consider the case when a subscriber is sampling from a topic *less frequently* than a publisher is populating it. There will be a net increase in the amount of messages stored in that topic. History and depth define how messages are taken out, and how long a message persists until it is erased.

The history field can be set to either `keeplast`, where it functions as a regular queue, or `keepall`, which saves all messages. However, there are limits to the amount of memory that can be allocated to a topic.

Here is some code that sets up a network to process messages.

```MATLAB
% Create a publisher to provide sensor data
robotNode = ros2node("/simple_robot");
lidarPub = ros2publisher(robotNode, "/laser_scan", "sensor_msgs/PointCloud2", "History", "keeplast", "Depth", 20);

% Create a subscriber representing localization, requiring all scan data
hFig = figure;
hAxesLidar = axes("Parent", hfig);
title("Message Timeline (Keep All)");
localizationSub = ros2subscriber(robotNode, "/laser_scan", @(msg)exampleHelperROS2PlotTimestamps(msg, hAxesLidar), "History", "keepall");

% Send messages, simulating an extremely fast sensor
load robotPosLidarData.mat lidarScans
for iMsg = 1:numel(lidarScans)
	send(lidarPub, lidarScans(iMsg))
end

% Allow messages to arrive, then remove the localization subscriber 
pause(3)
```

If you don't care about having dropped messages, a smaller queue can improve performance. This example shows quicker message processing

```MATLAB
% Create a subscriber representing user interface display
clear localizationSub
hFig = figure;
hAxesLidar2 = axes("Parent", hFig)
title("Message Timeline (Keep Last 1)")
scanDisplaySub = ros2subscriber(robotNode,"/laser_scan", @(msg)exampleHelperROS2PlotTimestamps(msg,hAxesLidar2), "History","keeplast","Depth",1);
for iMsg = 1:numel(lidarScans)
    send(lidarPub,lidarScans(iMsg))
end

% Allow messages to arrive, then remove the subscriber and publisher
pause(3)
```

The reliability field can also be set to two options. "reliable" means that the publisher continuously sends the message to the subscriber until the subscriber confirms receipt. "besteffort" means that the subscriber sends the message only once, regardless of confirmation of receipt.

Here is an example that uses a "reliable" connection.

```MATLAB
% Create a publisher for odometry data
odomPub = ros2publisher(robotNode,"/odom","nav_msgs/Odometry",...
    "Reliability","reliable");

% Create a subscriber for localization
hFig = figure;
hAxesReliable = axes("Parent",hFig);
title("Robot Position (Reliable Connection)")
xlabel("X (m)")
ylabel("Y (m)")
odomPlotSub = ros2subscriber(robotNode,"/odom",...
    @(msg)exampleHelperROS2PlotOdom(msg,hAxesReliable,"ok"),...
    "Reliability","reliable");

% Send messages, simulating an extremely fast sensor
load robotPoseLidarData.mat odomData
for iMsg = 1:numel(odomData)
    send(odomPub,odomData(iMsg))
end

pause(3)    % Allow messages to arrive and be plotted
```

Here is an example that uses a "besteffort" connection.

```MATLAB
hFig = figure;
hAxesBestEffort = axes("Parent",hFig);
title("Message Timeline (Best Effort Connection)")
odomTimingSub = ros2subscriber(robotNode,"/odom",...
    @(msg)exampleHelperROS2PlotTimestamps(msg,hAxesBestEffort),...
    "Reliability","besteffort");
for iMsg = 1:numel(odomData)
    send(odomPub,odomData(iMsg))
end

pause(3)    % Allow messages to arrive and be plotted
```

## Compatibility

Publishers and subscribers need to agree about the protocols defining message delivery. Up until now, we've been using the default values when initializing publishers and subscribers, so we didn't have to worry about making sure they were compatible. "besteffort" publishers can't connect to a "reliable" subscriber, because that subscriber demands that all messages are received. Here's an example that uses a "besteffort" publisher.

```MATLAB
% Reactivate reliable subscriber to show no messages received
odomPlotSub.NewMessageFcn = @(msg)exampleHelperROS2PlotOdom(msg,hAxesReliable,"*r");

% Send messages from a best-effort publisher
bestEffortOdomPub = ros2publisher(robotNode, "/odom", "nav_msgs/Odometry", "Reliability", "besteffort");
for iMsg = 1:numel(odomData)
    send(bestEffortOdomPub,odomData(iMsg))
end

% Allow messages to arrive, then remove odometry publishers and subscribers
pause(3)    % Allow messages to arrive and be plotted
```

## Durability and Depth

The durability option can be set to "transientlocal" or "volatile". Enabling "transientlocal" on a publisher means that messages are maintained after they have been sent. If a subscriber joins the network with "transientlocal" enabled, the maintained messages are then sent to the subscriber. "volatile" means that sent messages are not maintained, and subscribers do not request persisted messages from publishers.

The number of messages persisted by publishers with "transientlocal" is also controlled by `Depth`. Subscribers can only request the number of recent messages based on their individual `Depth` settings, but publishers are able to store as many as they want.

This last example shows how a path visualizer might plot all positions the robot has been in, but a localization algorithm only requires the most recent position.

```MATLAB
% Publish robot location information
posePub = ros2publisher(robotNode, "/bot_position", "geometry_msgs/Pose2D", "Durability", "transientlocal", "Depth",100);
load robotPoseLidarData.mat robotPositions
for iMsg = 1:numel(robotPositions)
    send(posePub,robotPositions(iMsg))
    pause(0.2)     % Allow for processing time
end

% Create a localization update subscriber that only needs current position
localUpdateSub = ros2subscriber(robotNode, "/bot_position", @disp, "Durability", "transientlocal", "Depth", 1);
pause(1)    % Allow message to arrive

% Create a visualization subscriber to show where the robot has been
hFig = figure;
hAxesMoreMsgs = axes("Parent", hFig);
title("Robot Position (Transient Local Connection)")
xlabel("X (m)")
ylabel("Y (m)")
hold on
posePlotSub = ros2subscriber(robotNode, "/bot_position", @(msg)plot(hAxesMoreMsgs,msg.x,msg.y,"ok"), "Durability", "transientlocal", "Depth", 20);
pause(3)    % Allow messages to arrive and be plotted
```

Commit message:

added line to open example files

ros_workshop/week_4/4.md, after:

# Agenda
1. More on ROS 2 Messaging
2. Create a simple simulation with ROS 2 and Simulink
3. Take poll on Gazebo vs. Robotics Systems Toolbox

## Helpful Commands
`ros2 node list` lists all nodes in the network
`ros2 topic list` lists all topics in the network
`ros2 msg list` lists all message types defined in ROS 2

# Quality of Service Policies
Last week we looked at creating publishers and subscribers in ROS 2, and connected them with topics. This week we're going to fill in some gaps that appeared with topics. Topics in ROS 2 have 4 paramaters:
1. History - Message queue mode
2. Depth - Message queue size
3. Reliability - Delivery guarantee of messages
4. Durability - Persistence of messages

To understand why history and depth are useful, consider the case when a subscriber is sampling from a topic *less frequently* than a publisher is populating it. There will be a net increase in the amount of messages stored in that topic. History and depth define how messages are taken out, and how long a message persists until it is erased.

The **very first thing** you need to do is run the command `openExample('ros/ManageQualityOfServicePoliciesInROS2Example')`. This gives you access to the files and functions you need to work through the following examples.

The history field can be set to either `keeplast`, where it functions as a regular queue, or `keepall`, which saves all messages. However, there are limits to the amount of memory that can be allocated to a topic.

Here is some code that sets up a network to process messages.

```MATLAB
% Create a publisher to provide sensor data
robotNode = ros2node("/simple_robot");
lidarPub = ros2publisher(robotNode, "/laser_scan", "sensor_msgs/PointCloud2", "History", "keeplast", "Depth", 20);

% Create a subscriber representing localization, requiring all scan data
hFig = figure;
hAxesLidar = axes("Parent", hfig);
title("Message Timeline (Keep All)");
localizationSub = ros2subscriber(robotNode, "/laser_scan", @(msg)exampleHelperROS2PlotTimestamps(msg, hAxesLidar), "History", "keepall");

% Send messages, simulating an extremely fast sensor
load robotPosLidarData.mat lidarScans
for iMsg = 1:numel(lidarScans)
	send(lidarPub, lidarScans(iMsg))
end

% Allow messages to arrive, then remove the localization subscriber 
pause(3)
```

If you don't care about having dropped messages, a smaller queue can improve performance. This example shows quicker message processing

```MATLAB
% Create a subscriber representing user interface display
clear localizationSub
hFig = figure;
hAxesLidar2 = axes("Parent", hFig)
title("Message Timeline (Keep Last 1)")
scanDisplaySub = ros2subscriber(robotNode,"/laser_scan", @(msg)exampleHelperROS2PlotTimestamps(msg,hAxesLidar2), "History","keeplast","Depth",1);
for iMsg = 1:numel(lidarScans)
    send(lidarPub,lidarScans(iMsg))
end

% Allow messages to arrive, then remove the subscriber and publisher
pause(3)
```

The reliability field can also be set to two options. "reliable" means that the publisher continuously sends the message to the subscriber until the subscriber confirms receipt. "besteffort" means that the subscriber sends the message only once, regardless of confirmation of receipt.

Here is an example that uses a "reliable" connection.

```MATLAB
% Create a publisher for odometry data
odomPub = ros2publisher(robotNode,"/odom","nav_msgs/Odometry",...
    "Reliability","reliable");

% Create a subscriber for localization
hFig = figure;
hAxesReliable = axes("Parent",hFig);
title("Robot Position (Reliable Connection)")
xlabel("X (m)")
ylabel("Y (m)")
odomPlotSub = ros2subscriber(robotNode,"/odom",...
    @(msg)exampleHelperROS2PlotOdom(msg,hAxesReliable,"ok"),...
    "Reliability","reliable");

% Send messages, simulating an extremely fast sensor
load robotPoseLidarData.mat odomData
for iMsg = 1:numel(odomData)
    send(odomPub,odomData(iMsg))
end

pause(3)    % Allow messages to arrive and be plotted
```

Here is an example that uses a "besteffort" connection.

```MATLAB
hFig = figure;
hAxesBestEffort = axes("Parent",hFig);
title("Message Timeline (Best Effort Connection)")
odomTimingSub = ros2subscriber(robotNode,"/odom",...
    @(msg)exampleHelperROS2PlotTimestamps(msg,hAxesBestEffort),...
    "Reliability","besteffort");
for iMsg = 1:numel(odomData)
    send(odomPub,odomData(iMsg))
end

pause(3)    % Allow messages to arrive and be plotted
```

## Compatibility

Publishers and subscribers need to agree about the protocols defining message delivery. Up until now, we've been using the default values when initializing publishers and subscribers, so we didn't have to worry about making sure they were compatible. "besteffort" publishers can't connect to a "reliable" subscriber, because that subscriber demands that all messages are received. Here's an example that uses a "besteffort" publisher.

```MATLAB
% Reactivate reliable subscriber to show no messages received
odomPlotSub.NewMessageFcn = @(msg)exampleHelperROS2PlotOdom(msg,hAxesReliable,"*r");

% Send messages from a best-effort publisher
bestEffortOdomPub = ros2publisher(robotNode, "/odom", "nav_msgs/Odometry", "Reliability", "besteffort");
for iMsg = 1:numel(odomData)
    send(bestEffortOdomPub,odomData(iMsg))
end

% Allow messages to arrive, then remove odometry publishers and subscribers
pause(3)    % Allow messages to arrive and be plotted
```

## Durability and Depth

The durability option can be set to "transientlocal" or "volatile". Enabling "transientlocal" on a publisher means that messages are maintained after they have been sent. If a subscriber joins the network with "transientlocal" enabled, the maintained messages are then sent to the subscriber. "volatile" means that sent messages are not maintained, and subscribers do not request persisted messages from publishers.

The number of messages persisted by publishers with "transientlocal" is also controlled by `Depth`. Subscribers can only request the number of recent messages based on their individual `Depth` settings, but publishers are able to store as many as they want.

This last example shows how a path visualizer might plot all positions the robot has been in, but a localization algorithm only requires the most recent position.

```MATLAB
% Publish robot location information
posePub = ros2publisher(robotNode, "/bot_position", "geometry_msgs/Pose2D", "Durability", "transientlocal", "Depth",100);
load robotPoseLidarData.mat robotPositions
for iMsg = 1:numel(robotPositions)
    send(posePub,robotPositions(iMsg))
    pause(0.2)     % Allow for processing time
end

% Create a localization update subscriber that only needs current position
localUpdateSub = ros2subscriber(robotNode, "/bot_position", @disp, "Durability", "transientlocal", "Depth", 1);
pause(1)    % Allow message to arrive

% Create a visualization subscriber to show where the robot has been
hFig = figure;
hAxesMoreMsgs = axes("Parent", hFig);
title("Robot Position (Transient Local Connection)")
xlabel("X (m)")
ylabel("Y (m)")
hold on
posePlotSub = ros2subscriber(robotNode, "/bot_position", @(msg)plot(hAxesMoreMsgs,msg.x,msg.y,"ok"), "Durability", "transientlocal", "Depth", 20);
pause(3)    % Allow messages to arrive and be plotted
```
